I don't think anyone would argue that
Steven Miller is sitting in his office
in the White House carefully balancing
the dictates of Christian charity and
the biblical admonitions about the
importance of building walls. Steven
Miller just wants to deport people.
>> I'm for deporting people. I really like
Steven Miller. Evangelical support for
deporting illegal immigrants is very
high.
[Music]
>> In the world of online influencers,
one evangelical Christian writer and
podcaster stands out.
>> We've got uh a lot to get to on today's
episode of Relatable.
>> Offering her audience a blend of
politics, theology, and lifestyle
advice. Trump round two is not here to
make friends and I love that.
Progressive propaganda is everywhere,
especially on Tik Tok. Wear a dress to
church. Don't act ugly.
>> Is Ali Beth Stucky an example of what
religious authority looks like in
America today.
>> Satan is in a battle not just for our
souls, but for our bodies. Liberals will
do anything but read their Bible. And
why does she think the biggest problem
in American politics isn't too much
cruelty, but the wrong kind of empathy?
>> Your empathy becomes toxic when it
encourages you to validate lies, to
affirm sin, and when we ignore facts in
favor of feelings. We tend to push for
policy that does not make sense and is
destructive.
>> Ali Beth Stucky, welcome to Interesting
Times.
>> Thank you. I appreciate it.
>> It's No, the pleasure is all mine. Uh so
we're going to try and have a
conversation that covers evangelical
Christianity, uh some of the divides
within it, its relationship to Donald
Trump, but first I want to talk about
what it is that you do. So, you make a
podcast called Relatable, and The
Atlantic wrote a profile of you a little
while ago, and I think they called you
something like the new Phyis Schlaffley,
which is a reference, of course, to the
famous female conservative activist from
the 1970s and 1980s. So, just to start
out, what is it that you do? Are you a
political commentator, a religious
teacher, a lifestyle influencer?
>> Yes, that's a great question. And so I
try to occupy that space where politics
and theology intersect, Christian
theology specifically, and I describe
myself as a Christian wife and mom who
is trying to navigate the chaos of our
culture with as much clarity and courage
as God is willing to give me. And so
that does mean talking about politics.
There are seasons over the past few
years that I have focused mostly on
politics, especially in an election
year. You're not simply voting for the
lesser of two evils. You are voting to
lessen evil. I really want especially
the mostly suburban moms and women ages
25 to 45 that are listening to this show
to understand what is at stake. What's
the difference between the two
candidates? And I don't try to remain
neutral in that. Everyone knows I'm a
Christian conservative thus far. I have
always voted Republican. But there are
also a lot of times and I would say
right now is this kind of season where I
and I think my audience kind of feel
exhausted by the news cycle. They're not
as interested in politics as they were
before and they're more interested in
talking about the deeper underlying
theological issues or topics or trends.
And I like to focus on that. And so I
don't know if I could say that I am
squarely a political commentator. I
certainly wouldn't call myself a Bible
study leader or religious teacher. I
just try to occupy the space where those
two things very clearly mix together and
intersect as much as I possibly can.
>> There's also just a strong sort of
parenting and motherhood and sort of
female life element I I feel like to
what you do and what you talk about.
Right. So just looking at you know
looking at your recent podcasts right
like there's discussions about you know
Christian evangelism in LA and abortion
and politics.
>> We need to start thinking about the
dignity and the humanity of every human
being from the moment of conception.
>> And then there's also discussions about
sunscreen and parenting styles right and
the secret to fixing your period. So, it
sounds like there are a lot of potential
natural remedies for the minstal issues
that people have.
>> So, I almost feel like you're selling
yourself almost, you know, a little bit
short by sort of saying it's just about
politics and theology, right? Like it's
it's an
>> it's a larger discussion, right? About
sort of how to be a Christian woman with
an emphasis both on Christian and on
woman. Yeah, I think that's a fair
point. We certainly do talk about
lifestyle things and while I don't
consider myself some sort of like
mainstay in the maha movement, there are
a lot of principles in that that I
really appreciate. We have been talking
about health and wellness and certainly
since co some of the deception that we
see in the medical industry coming from
official science and scientific
institutions like the CDC and I think
that has kind of given way to a
conversation consistently on my podcast
about okay what is actually true
scientifically what is true about our
bodies and how do we apply that to how
we take care of ourselves and how we
take care of our families and so yes
that definitely intersects with
motherhood, but I also don't consider
myself some kind of like family or
motherhood influencer, if that makes
sense.
>> Yeah. No, it it absolutely does. So, who
who is who is your audience right now?
Who is who is the Ali Bethstake
listener?
>> Yes. I would say it is mostly Christian
conservative women ages 25 to 45. There
are obviously men who listen as well,
but that is
>> how many how many men how many men
listen to the show? They have they have
their own number. They're even called
the Related Bros. And I call my husband
Chief Related Bro. He is the head of the
Related Bros. And I would say at least
from the YouTube demographic information
that we have, I believe it's 85% female
or maybe 80% female. And so there's a
chunk there's definitely a chunk of men
who listen to and watch the show. But
it's not like always some episodes like
how to fix your period probably not
going to be for them. But other episodes
they can enjoy just as much.
>> So related bros women 25 to 45. Um what
else would you say that people who are
in sort of your sphere are listening to
and reading and consuming? Do you feel
like you're part of a larger millennial
and maybe Zoomer ecosystem for younger
Christians? Hm. I would say if my
audience wants day-to-day news, they are
probably a lot of them are probably
watching Megan Kelly, which I would say
me too. I I love Megan and I love her
analysis of the news. And so I think a
lot of them are probably going to her
for that. For a big chunk, it seems of
my audience, I am the only connection to
the news and politics that they have,
which I take that role very seriously in
their lives. Um, and so they're not
listening to a bunch of other, you know,
political shows, too.
>> That's really, that's really
interesting. Do you feel like you're the
main sort of religious sort of
conversation partner
>> for not not in terms of like the home or
church, but in terms of the internet?
>> I I I don't think so. I think for
Christian women, I think in the
Christian world, I am seen as political.
So in the larger evangelical world, if
they think Ally Beth Stucky, they're
thinking she talks politics. I think in
the political worlds, like when I'm
going to speak at Turning Point or speak
at a, you know, conservative
organization conference, they think of
me as the Christian one. I am going to
talk about the legacy of Christian
courage that is our heritage as
Christians. The one who is always
talking about the Bible. Um, so yeah, I
I think for one group I'm probably the
plug-in for religion and Christianity.
For another group, they see me as their
connection to politics.
>> Interesting. And
why why do you think younger women are
drawn to
your particular style, your way of
talking about the world?
>> I think it is number one clarity. I
think from a lot of evangelical leaders
and pastors who have, I would say, a
tougher job than me in a lot of ways.
So, I'm not trying to throw all of them
under the bus, but they're just not as
clear about what the what does the Bible
say about gender? What does the Bible
say about marriage? Does the Bible have
anything to say about immigration? I
think the biggest surge in followers,
listeners that I had, at least at in a
short period of time, was in 2020 when
everyone was posting the black square.
Everyone was saying that George Floyd
was killed because of racism. Everyone
was saying that white people and
especially white evangelicals had a role
to play in George Floyd's death. We all
need to sit back and listen and learn.
And even in churches, we need to be
reading white fragility. And I don't
like to like pat myself on the back at
all cuz I certainly wasn't alone. But
among white evangelical women, I have
been one of the only ones to say no,
that's not biblical and that's not how
I'm talking about it. I'm not going to
shame white women. I'm not going to say
that they need to sit down and shut up
and be lambasted for something that
someone who might have looked like them
in the same geographical region did 200
years ago or 50 years ago. That's not
the biblical definition of justice. And
so I think that there have been a lot of
points like that over the past 5 years
where it seems like evangelicals have
gone soft, just moved to the left,
especially on social justice and race
issues where I have been one of the only
ones that these women are listening to
willing to say no. And not because I'm
cruel, not because I'm harsh, but
because I don't think that's what the
Bible says. And I think God's justice
and love and mercy and truth are much
better than the secular social justice
mongers would have you believe.
>> So I want to go further on on the
argument that you just raised sort of
the critique of um evangelical leaders
drifting to the left. But before that
can you talk a little bit about sort of
how you grew up and your religious
upbringing?
>> Yes. So, I am very grateful that I was
raised in a conservative Christian home.
I don't remember talking about politics
a whole lot growing up. I do remember
really caring about the Bush Gore
election. Now, mind you, I was in second
grade at at this time and I remember we
had this mock election in our classroom
and only one girl said that she and her
parents were going to vote for Al Gore.
It was this huge deal. And because I was
raised in a very conservative suburb of
Dallas and I went to a conservative
Christian uh school, kindergarten
through 12th grade. And so all of that,
I'm sure, contributed to kind of like my
natural conservatism. Uh but certainly a
Christian upbringing certainly that
contributed to the values that I still
hold today. Southern Baptist church
growing up, Wednesday, Sunday morning,
Sunday night, all of that good stuff.
parents really not only talked the talk
but walked the walk. Um, which I think
also has helped me.
>> So, and are you still a Southern
Baptist?
>> Yes, I still go to a Southern Baptist
church. I don't know if I align with
every single doctrinal belief that I had
in the churches growing up, but I do
still consider myself a Southern
Baptist.
>> Well, we'll talk a little bit about
that. Was there any kind of pivot point
in your in your own religious
development?
>> Yeah, so grew up going to Southern
Baptist churches in high school. I
started going to a non-denomin
non-denominational church by myself, I
think when I was a junior. I do remember
that church and a Bible teacher that I
had in school in my junior year um
really kind of opening my eyes to
reformed theology. And it was in college
that I probably would have started
identifying as reformed.
>> So go go go a little further because my
suspicion is that at least part of our
audience um isn't intensely familiar
with for instance
reformed or Calvinist views on the end
times. So what what does it mean to in
the context of American Protestantism?
If somebody says I identify as reformed,
what what does that mean?
Well, like a lot of things within
Protestant
>> in less than, you know, in less than
less than all there's a long answer, a
short one.
>> I'll I'll give a short answer, but
suffice it to say, there are
disagreements about what it means to be
reformed. I would consider myself a
reformed Baptist. What I mean by that is
that gosh, I I don't know if there's a
short way to explain all of this.
talking about predestination.
That is a centerpiece of Calvinism.
Whether you believe that people were
predestined to be Christians or whether
it is by human effort that we are saved.
Um, but I fall into the predestination
camp. Um, we also just have a really big
emphasis on theological study and I
would say biblical literalism in a lot
of ways. And yeah, gosh, I I don't know.
Oh, it just depends on you to go.
>> Yeah. Well, well, let let's we don't
want to take up the whole conversation
with this, but let's extend it in a
couple ways, right? So, so reformed,
right, means, let's say, a really strong
emphasis on
>> God's grace and God's will over and
against sort of human effort, human
effort alone. There's an incredibly
strong emphasis on the Bible, not just
as the word of God, but as sort of the
defining test of Christian life in a way
that again is sort of distinct from
Catholicism's emphasis on the authority
of the pope or the bishops. But let's
let's do the beginning and the end of
the world and and then we'll and then
we'll move on. Right? So, um we can do
the end of the world first. The so
there's a lot of debates in evangelical
Protestantism about the end times and
what Christians should expect, how to
interpret the book of Revelation, all
these kinds of things. So where does
where does your tradition fall on that?
>> Yeah. I would call myself a classic or
historic pre-millennialist.
And for those out there that are like,
what are y'all even talking about? I'm
sorry. You don't need to know this right
now to become a Christian. But like
classical premillennialist means that I
I don't believe that Christians are
going to be raptured before the
tribulation. I think that we are here
for that that we're not going to escape
that by a rapture. Um yeah, and then
there are differences in view as well on
the role of Israel. What is Israel? Who
is Israel? There's a lot of debate about
that right now within Christianity too,
especially in light of the end times.
>> Right. And just to to oversimplify,
your camp is a little less likely to
identify the current state of Israel
with the biblical Israel in a way that
um other evangelicals might be likely to
do.
>> Yes. And that is where I would diverge
from the vast majority of Southern
Baptists who do believe that God has a
special particular plan for Israel's
salvation, that it is the current
geographical state of Israel. Whereas I
would point to several passages in
scripture to say that that's not quite
right. Even though, as I've said many
times, I do supporting Israel in a
variety of ways for other reasons.
>> Right. And so just since I promised the
beginning as well, um are from from your
perspective, are you are you a six day
creationist? Do you think that the world
was literally
>> literally made in six days, right? As as
in as in the beginning of Genesis,
>> right?
>> Yes. It seems to me that that's what
Jesus believes. And when he speaks about
the Old Testament and the creation
order, he seems to speak of it in a
literal sense when he's speaking in the
Gospels. And that's a good verification
for me.
>> Okay. So that's so that's sort of where
where you've ended up. Um you belong to
a tradition that does not um have female
pastors. Uh that you know follows um St.
Paul's words about um how women should
not be leaders speaking in church and so
on. And I think a lot of a lot of people
outside your religious context would see
that as a tension, right? That you know,
here's someone who belongs to a church
that doesn't have female pastors and yet
is presenting herself as an authority
figure, right? As in your framing
filling the breach when actual pastors
are failing. So, do you think that's
attention?
>> That's a great question. Yes, I do take
literally Paul's admonition that women
are not to teach in church. Now, there
is a debate and we could even get into
this. This would probably be an
interesting conversation how I think
like the Christian right has actually
changed in the past 5 years when it
comes to how they see the role of women.
5 years ago, no one talked about that
tension to me. No one had an issue with
me saying, "Yeah, I don't think women
should be pastors and preachers." But I
don't take that to mean that women
shouldn't talk. That women can't be
persuasive. That there aren't different
ways for women to lead and influence and
persuade outside of the context of the
pullpit in the local church on Sunday
morning. It does get tricky when it
seems like I am saying which I try not
to say explicitly but like hey your male
pastor is acting cowardly and he's not
being clear on this don't listen to that
because he's asking you to compromise
but I'm not trying to say listen to me
or follow me or you should listen to
this podcast instead of going to church.
I'm trying to say whether you listen to
me or not, read your Bible. And I want
your reading of the Bible to determine
what church you go to. And if you don't
go to a church that is preaching the
entire council of God, even when that is
inconvenient for the culture, then you
should go to a different church.
>> What do you think Paul means then? or
what do you what do you think is the key
distinction here between
sort of church Sunday morning as a space
of male authority and you know Tuesday
morning podcasting as a space of
>> we we'll just call it female
communication but look but look let's
let's be honest you're not just
communicating right you're making an
argument you're making a critique and
whether you vest yourself with a
pastor's authority or not there are
people who regard you as authoritative.
>> So what what is what is the theological
distinction from your perspective
between that kind of Sunday morning
space and
your work outside of sort of the work of
a pastor?
>> Well, one is church and one is not. And
the church has a distinct governing
body. And the pastor has not only the
role of persuasion. Although I agree
with you, that's basically what a sermon
is. But he's not just a preacher. He is
also a pastor. He is also a shepherd. He
has the ability to exercise church
discipline. And I am not that. I don't
have the authority to exercise those
things over someone's life. And yes, of
course, people do regard me as a leader
in some sense. Um but I don't think that
there is any command against that kind
of influence and mode of persuasion in
scripture when it comes to women. Um the
church is the body of Christ or the
church is the bride of Christ rather is
what I meant to say and it is distinct
from a podcast studio as you know and I
I'm sure you agree with this as a
Catholic. It's not just four walls. It
is distinct from the rest of the world.
>> I I do agree. I I think that in if you
look at sort of the Catholic tradition
um you see a lot of cases where
prominent female leaders seem to emerge
with a message that is seems intended to
honestly to shame men in authority in
the church. And I I'm curious if you
think that sort of the exercise of
female authority
in in your church in your religious
landscape is itself a reflection of sort
of male failure,
>> right? That like you're here and people
are listening to you because men are
failing.
>> Um I do think that many pastors are
failing. Um, I don't know if I can say
all men in the Southern Baptist or
evangelical world are failing, but I
think many and now I think that there
are a lot of clear and obedient and
courageous pastors and just because
they're not going viral or they're not
written about in the media, um, you
know, that doesn't mean that they don't
exist. But there are some very prominent
leaders and prominent figures within
evangelicalism who are straight up soft.
They're soft when it comes to sexuality.
They were soft when it came to the
necessity of churches meeting together
physically during COVID. They were soft
when it came to the difference between
biblical justice and secular social
justice. And they are unwilling to say
simply what the Bible says about these
things. I don't think that pastors
should get up every Sunday and tell you
what's going on in the news. I don't
think that they are bound to the news
cycle. But when the Bible says in the
beginning, you know, God created them
male and female. In his image, he
created them, they shouldn't avoid that.
They shouldn't pretend like that doesn't
mean what it means. We shouldn't pretend
that the Bible doesn't speak so clearly
to so many of the so-called culture war
issues of our day. And because they are
scared of what they may lose by speaking
up because they like to be written about
nicely in the New York Times or
wherever, um, they're just not willing
to say it. And I think that's a travesty
because I think clarity is the most
loving thing that we can give the people
who listen to us.
>> All right. So, let's go a little deeper
into this this critique. Right. So, you
um wrote a book entitled Toxic Empathy:
How Progressives Exploit Christian
Compassion. And so you can see just from
the subtitle that it is effectively both
a critique of secular progressivism and
also a critique of um your fellow
Christians, right? And I think a lot of
people
hear a word like empathy and think that
it is just something that Christians are
automatically called to and that a
critique of empathy is effectively a
critique of Christianity itself. Right?
Mhm.
>> Um, so what is toxic empathy? What is
wrong with some forms of empathy from
your perspective?
>> Mhm. And that is correct. Some forms of
empathy. I argue and this is not my
original argument. I I heard Abigail
Shrier first say this and I think she
might have even gotten this from Paul
Bloom which is a Yale psychologist who
wrote a book called Against Empathy. An
interesting side note is that in fact my
own mother uh once wrote an essay
critiquing empathy for First Things
magazine some years ago in which she
drew on Paul Bloom who is a secular
psychologist criticizing from a secular
perspective a sort of overidentification
with other people's feelings. Um all of
which is to say I am I am a somewhat
sympathetic audience for this kind of
argument.
>> Yeah. So I I just wanted to give proper
credit to what for this first line that
I'm about to say um is that empathy by
itself is neutral. Um empathy by itself
I believe um is neither good nor bad.
And I that's probably not an exact quote
from Paul Bloom, but that's kind of
where I got that line of reasoning is
that it is not in itself a virtue. It is
not in itself something that we should
aspire to. And that alone kind of like
knocks people off their skates when I
say that. I say that it can be positive
in what it can lead you to or it can be
negative in what it can lead you to. An
example I give in my book. I was
traveling um with my three-year-old at
the time. We were going to Atlanta. My
hands were full. She was in her runaway
era. I was trying to get down the jet
bridge. There was no way that I could
control her and get all the stuff that I
needed down. So, I just literally sat
down and I didn't know what to do and I
was almost on the verge of tears and
this woman came up to me. I had all
these people pass me by and this woman
came up to me and she just looked at me
and she said, "It's okay. I'm a mom. I
get it." And she got one of my bags and
we made it to our seat and it was great.
And then just a couple weeks later, I
was traveling by myself and I saw this
mom with her toddler. She had her
stroller. She had all of her stuff and I
could see it like she was on the verge
of tears. She was trying to get to her
seat and she didn't know how she was
going to do it. Well, I had been there.
I felt so deeply exactly how she felt.
And because of that, because I just knew
so personally the stress that she was
feeling, I was able to meet her need and
I grabbed her bag, she made it to her
seat, and she was good to go. And so,
having been there, being able to put
yourself in someone's shoes can lead you
to do the right thing. It can lead you
to sacrifice. It can lead you to
selflessness. can lead you to acts of
love and kindness. But putting yourself
in someone's shoes, feeling what they
feel can also lead you, I say, to do
three things that makes empathy toxic.
And that is one, validate lies. That is
two, affirm sin. And that is three,
support destructive policies. Those are
the three characteristics that I put on
empathy that I think can make it toxic.
So in your in your definition, just so
listeners are clear, empathy means the
act of feeling or trying to feel what
others are feeling. And it's distinct
therefore from
compassion or sympathy where you are
trying to help someone. You might feel
bad for them, but you aren't sort of
trying to feel directly their set of
emotions. This is primarily then about
empathizing
with people who are either doing
something that is wrong for
understandable human reasons um or who
are supporting policies
that are themselves going to lead to bad
outcomes even if they have charitable
motives.
>> Well, it's not it's it's not against
even feeling trying to feel how they
feel. It is allowing feeling how they
feel to lead you to justify what they
are doing which happens in abortion in
the gender debate and the sexuality
debate and the justice debate and the
immigration debate because we feel so
deeply for this one purported victim. We
say, "Well, maybe deportation is wrong,
or maybe I should affirm this person's
stated gender even though it misses
mismatches their biology, or maybe I
should affirm the right to have an
abortion because I feel so deeply for
this person's plight." That is when your
empathy has led you in a bad direction
and I think has turned toxic. But this
is this is somewhat distinct then from
one of the arguments that Paul Bloom
makes in his book, right? Which is that
one problem with empathy is that it can
actually sort of lead in the other
direction towards this kind of
helplessness. Everything that happens in
the world you feel in some way because
you're empathizing with other people so
much and this sort of paralyzes you.
It's like okay the problems of the world
are too large. I can't I can't possibly
solve them. Right? Do you think that's a
problem with empathy as well?
>> Yes. That's not a theme that I explore
in my book. Although I think it's
interesting. I also think it's
interesting that actually the more you
emphasize, especially with kids, like in
the classroom, the more you emphasize
empathy, the meaner those kids can get
to those in the out group. I think that
Abigail Shrier phrased it like this,
full of empathy and mean as hell. And I
see that with a lot of progressives, and
I call it misplaced mothering. I think a
lot of progressives, they take under
their wing those that they see as
victims. So, say it is the man who
identifies as a woman who wants to go
into the women's bathroom, wants to play
against women in sports. They see this
person as marginalized, as vulnerable,
as misunderstood,
and they feel so deeply for them. They
feel so deeply for their pain that
anyone who comes against their um their
chosen victim, this person that they
care for, they have a hostile reaction
to in the same way that a mama bear
would have a hostile reaction to someone
who is trying to attack her cubs. That
is how I think a lot of deeply feeling
progressives feel about illegal aliens
or whoever they see as a victim. Those
of us who are on the other side of the
issue, they actually see as oppressors,
as enemies of their chosen victims. And
I think that's why it causes just the
absolute cruelty that often we see from
progressives who simultaneously say that
they are deeply empathetic and loving.
So this is a critique of progressivism
and how progressivism has ended up um
essentially
taking particular sides in the
immigration debate and the debates about
transgenderism other issues like that
right but then it's also a critique of
your fellow Christians right you think
that this is a trap that people who have
sort of theologically conservative
commitments in act in many cases have
fallen into especially over over the
last 5 or 10 years.
>> Yes. Especially I would say in the
summer of 2020. I mean I saw this a lot
with COVID but I also saw this a lot
when it came to the conversation about
race and police brutality. We'd have
these claims that America is
systemically racist, that the church has
played a large part in that, that white
people need to be apologetic and humble
and listen and learn and all of this
stuff. And I would point to certain
statistics or I would question certain
narratives. And what I got told over and
over again is that sometimes the truth
doesn't matter. Sometimes it doesn't
matter what the data says. That you just
have to have empathy. And while I don't
disagree that sometimes you shouldn't
bring up data and facts in a
conversation with a person when you just
need to have compassion for them, the
truth actually does matter, especially
when it's leading to certain policy
decisions. And so I just don't buy that
idea that sometimes we have to exchange
the truth for empathy and let people
believe a lie because it feels better
for them. I think that that is actually
really cruel and hateful and ultimately
destructive.
>> Okay. So now let's talk about how this
argument looks from from the other side
of the debate for a minute. Right. And I
think what's interesting about how
you're describing this is you're framing
the divide in terms of what happened in
the year 2020. And that from from your
point of view, it seems like the divide
reflects the evangelical response to
COVID to the pandemic to whether
churches should accept longunning
restrictions.
>> Um, and Trump. So that's that's what I
wanted to bring it around to because
from the point of view of I think a lot
of people who um who you have criticized
or and who have certainly criticized
you, the divide just starts with Trump.
Um, and
where you see toxic empathy, right, they
see, I think, um, I'm not sure if
there's sort of a single word for it,
but sort of a a systematic delight in
other people's tears. I think that that
is sort of cru actually I mean cruel
cruelty I cruelty I guess, right, is the
one word phrase that Trump himself is
cruel. He mocks people. He's savage to
people and so on. But that also attached
to this, right, there's this sense of
like
>> we love to hear the liberals cry if
we're deporting people. Um, you know,
you see this in in the second Trump
term, we're going to make a, you know, a
YouTube video about about deportation
that's sort of reing in um, you know, re
reing in rounding people up and these
kind of things, right?
>> Yeah. And I I'm I think clearly if
empathy can be toxic, cruelty can be
even more toxic. Right. And so I I do Do
you think that that is a fair critique
of Trump and Trumpism and its impact on
American politics?
>> Maybe, but it's not a fair critique of
my argument. It's not a fair critique of
my book because my argument is that
toxic empathy is cruel. that it ignores
the people on the other side of the
moral equation. For example, if you take
the abortion issue, I start out by
telling the story of a woman named
Samantha. Her story was first told by
NPR. She found out that her baby had a
fatal fetal anomaly at the 20week mark,
but in Texas, she wasn't allowed to
abort her child. NPR tells the story as
if this was horrible for Samantha who
had to go through the financial,
physical, emotional burden of bearing
this child only to have this child to
die. By the end of the story, the reader
feels exactly how it seems NPR wants
them to feel, which is that this is a
great injustice towards Samantha. How
dare these draconian laws force her to
do something so painful, so financially
burdensome, we need to liberate women
from these anti-abortion laws that are
making them go through so much. Okay.
So, you have so much empathy for
Samantha that you support the
pro-abortion position by the end of this
through the mode of storytelling. But
then what I try to do is tell the story
from the other perspective. The actual
victim in this story, the wouldbe victim
in this story that NPR and most
mainstream media outlets do not want you
to know about, and that is the baby.
They don't want you to think about the
actual victim of abortion. So, what
would have been this baby whose name is
Halo? What would have been her fate if
Texas had not had this quote unquote
draconian pro-life law? She would have
been poisoned. She would have
dismembered, been dismembered. She would
have been discarded like toxic waste,
but instead she was delivered and
clothed and named and held and loved and
buried like the full human being that
she is. So my argument is that toxic
empathy because it only focuses on one
purported victim and ignores the actual
victims on the other side of the
equation. when it comes to any issue,
not just abortion, it is actually cruel
and destructive and deadly both for the
individual and for society. So, we can
agree that some of the things that Trump
has said that even Republicans, they're
much more brazen. I would agree with you
now about what some people would call
cruelty and we can get into that. But
it's I'm not saying that compassion is
bad. Actually, compassion and empathy
aren't even the same things. I'm saying
no. what you progressive in many cases
are calling empathetic are calling nice
is actually really cruel is actually
really bad. Um so yeah that's what I'm
saying. I'm actually saying that the
progressives use empathy as a vehicle to
ultimate cruelty.
>> But but so let's let's talk about a
different issue for a minute though.
Let's let's talk about immigration.
Right. So part part of your argument is
that as I as I understand it would be
that you have a set of um sort of
conservativeleaning evangelicals who are
alienated from Donald Trump in some way
um alienated from the Republican party
and end up being pulled to the left.
Right. Um but that this happens not just
on issues like abortion and transgender
issues, but it also happens on an issue
like immigration, right? And seems to me
that immigration is just an issue where
you know you have competing entire and
and entirely reasonable forms of we
don't even have to call it empathy. We
can just say sort of sympathy instead,
right? sort of a reflection uh that you
know that people have understandable
desires to have a better life and people
have understandable desires to you know
have have immigration proceed at a
reasonable rate that doesn't overwhelm
their communities. People have
understandable fears about crime and
disorder and violence. But these things
need to be balanced in various ways. And
it doesn't seem to me that there is sort
of a single definitive Christian
position on like what you know what what
the absolutely best immigration rate
should be or anything like that.
>> Yeah, I would agree with that part.
>> Where do you think your fellow
Christians have gone wrong on
immigration?
>> Yes. So, you are absolutely right. There
are always going to be people on any
issue, but especially immigration who
demand our empathy and like I'm okay
with saying that or you could say
sympathy or just feeling deeply for
their plight. I would say a lot of
people on the progressive side don't
even consider the plight of those who
have been negatively impacted by illegal
immigration on a large scale or on an
individual level. Um, I think that
ultimately, and this is really kind of
my argument in the book, is that there
are always going to be people on both
sides of any story with real pain, with
real stories that matter. And both
people are made in the image of God. So,
at the end of the day, that's why you
can't be led by empathy because if you
allow yourself, you can feel really deep
empathy for people with competing needs
and interests. And so at the end of the
day, I think the Christian has to ask
ourel, but what is true? And then what
does the Bible say? And you're right on
an issue like immigration, it's not as
clear as where the Bible stands when it
comes to the reality of the gender
binary of male and female, the
definition of marriage between one man
and one woman, or the value of life
starting at the moment of conception as
made in the imo day. Immigration is not
as clear. We can only look to scripture
to see the principles of nations, of
governance, of laws, of borders, of
security, of God's provision through
walls, the book of Nehemiah, and say,
okay, can we apply those principles to
America today? Do they still have
wisdom? Does it make sense why God
wanted secure walls for Jerusalem? Does
that still apply to America? We can just
use logic to say, okay, if we don't have
borders, we don't have sovereignty, then
we don't have citizenship, then we don't
have rights. And that's bad for
everyone, especially the most
vulnerable. And if we can't enforce
immigration law, then we essentially
have no borders or sovereignty. And of
course, there are going to be sad
stories within that. But at the end of
the day, sovereignty matters for every
single country, not just for America.
That's how I think through it. And I
think that there are people in good
faith who are sincere Christians who
could agree disagree with me on
different forms of immigration policy.
But for the people who simply use this
issue to kind of what I would say virtue
signal say I can't believe ICE is doing
this or Trump is doing this or this is
so bad or look at this one story even
though they'll never talk about Kate
Steinley or Lake and Riley or the
stories on the other side of it. The
stories on the other side are stories of
Americans who have been murdered or
assaulted by illegal immigrants.
>> I forget the New York Times audience
might not just know those uh stories
automatically in those names. But um I I
just want to know like what is their
solution? Really any progressive, not
just a Christian, but like what is their
solution? Like I I guess I don't know
the answer either, but I don't hear from
the other side. Like, do we have an
unconditional, unmitigated obligation to
accept everyone into America, no matter
what, just because they want a better
life? Is there any limit? Is there any
immigration law that we can enforce? Is
there any kind of way to nicely deport
and detain people who shouldn't be here?
And so, I'm not hearing a whole lot of
solutions from the other side either.
And maybe that's, I don't know, a place
that we can try to come together and
figure something out.
Well, I I guess what I'm interested in
is in part just sort of how
evangelicalism has ended up so polarized
and and this does seem like a case
honestly where it kind of makes a case
for empathy, right? that where you know
I I feel like my evangelical friends who
are very very anti-Trump like extremely
anti-Trump
um often
show a failure of understanding toward
why so many conservative Christians
would end up voting Republican even
under Trumpian conditions. And I I I
feel like there's a a pretty clear
failure of just sort of understanding
how the world looks from the perspective
of somebody who decides to stay
Republican and decides to stay a Trump
voter. I feel like I see this I see this
all the time.
>> Yeah.
>> But I also feel like there's a failure
of empathy from your side. Like you
know, you're you're an evangelical
Christian in 2015 2016. You watch your
political party being taken over by a
man whose personal life obviously defies
all of the moral norms that evangelicals
struggled so hard to uphold in the 1990s
during all the Bill Clinton
controversies and so on.
um a man whose policies
break with places where sincere pro-life
promarriage conservatives were deeply
you know deeply involved in work like
you know aid aid to Africa aid to the
developing world um and a president who
you know on immigration doesn't just say
we need to build the wall right he he
also clearly
uses sort of the language of of
scapegoat and cruelty around the very
large number of people who have
understandable reasons to migrate to the
United States, whether or not uh it's
reasonable for the United States to
welcome them. Sincere Christians recoil
from this man, recoil from his takeover
of the Republican party, and in the
process, yes, end up kind of inevitably
pulled somewhat to, you know, to their
left on issues where previously they
were further to the right. But isn't
that understandable? Like doesn't
doesn't that seem understandable to you
as someone who disagrees with these
people?
>> It's totally understandable. And I would
say that I have given a lot of credit to
that over the years, not only because I
sincerely understand it, but because
it's more persuasive when you try to
steal man someone's concerns rather than
diminish them. And I'm I've never voted
for Donald Trump in a primary because
I've had plenty of issues with how
Donald Trump talks or conducts himself.
And honestly, my critiques have been
from the right. Though I I have been
troubled by some of the things that he
said about abortion. Have worried if he
was really strong enough on the issues
that I care about or if this second term
would only be about some kind of
personal vendetta. I've actually been
very like pleasantly surprised and
pretty satisfied with a lot of the
things that he has actually done in the
way of conservatism. And so what I would
want the other side to understand is
that I hear you. I absolutely hear you.
However, from my perspective, the other
side is worse. Is was Donald Trump my
pick in the primary? Obviously, he was
the pick of a lot of people, but was he
my pick in the primary? And there's a
lot of
>> substantial majority.
>> Yes. And for a lot of Christians though
who are in my camp, there are plenty of
things about Donald Trump that we don't
love. But at the end of the day, when we
look at the policies that affect our
country, that affect our family. And
yes, uh, when we weigh them against
scripture, especially when it comes to
the gender debate, Donald Trump wins
every time against Joe Biden, every time
against Kla Harris, and all of the
things that they say that, well, at
least the Democrats do this better or
more compassionately or more biblically.
I just don't think that's true. I judge
policies by their outcomes, not by their
stated intentions. Democrats have a lot
of good stated intentions. I don't think
that the outcomes are kind or good,
beneficial for society. And so, yeah,
understand that there's a lot of us over
here who hear your concerns about Donald
Trump, who don't like his past uh
adultery and different things that he
has said, who would even, you know, take
issue with him saying the f-word. There
are a lot of us out there like that who
still say, "Wow, but under Joe Biden,
the USDA took funding away from public
schools that didn't allow boys into
girls' bathrooms. That's evil." And the
Trump administration is doing the
opposite of that and that's good. So,
yeah, there are some really big things
and a lot of big reasons that for I
mean, we would just never wouldn't vote
for Donald Trump if it's against another
Democrat like that. I want to go just
just fur further into your critique of
Trump and and and his second term, but
just just to pause on that issue on the
question of sort of good and evil
policies. Is there something that Donald
Trump could do on immigration policy
that you would consider evil?
>> H I am most sympathetic um when it comes
to the taking in of Christian refugees
from the Middle East and elsewhere. I
want these people to be protected. I
mean, my highest priority is the
protection of the preservation of
Christians and especially persecuted
Christians. And so I the stories that
I've seen about that of Christian
refugees from war torn areas having a
difficult time coming to the United
States. Um that I would say is the most
difficult for me. Although even in that,
it's so difficult because I don't think
that I can trust Christianity Today and
other liberal outlets to tell the total
truth because I know that they hate
Donald Trump. And so it takes a lot of
effort for those of us who are on the
conservative side, who are open to
arguments um against some immigration
policy if it is truly cruel, if it is
truly unwise. It's difficult for us to
know where to go to get the accurate
information because when you're only
seeing that stuff from people who hate
Donald Trump anyway and want Christians
to hate him, um it's a little hard to
take that at face value.
>> And do you do you think that there are
clear the like what what issues have
clear theological answers? meaning is
there a distinction between sort of
cultural issues or abortion or right to
life issues and we haven't talked about
climate change but that's another issue
right where there's a critique um of
evangelical elites or evangelical
pastors drifting to the left right but
it seems to me that there are certain
issues that Christian tradition speaks
to in a way that is distinct from how to
think about like scientific debates
about the rate of the you know the
impact of car like that's that's just
not a question where you know you open
Nehemiah and say um this is the thing to
take out of the Bible right
>> right now I agree with you I would
distinguish between creation order
issues and non-creation order issues I
think that a lot of the so-called
culture war issues that we debate today
are answered I mean I could say in the
first 27 seven verses of the Bible, but
you could say in the first three
chapters of the Bible or the first 11
chapters of the Bible, we get a lot of
questions answered. I don't think
there's any wiggle room about the
definition of gender or marriage or the
value of life inside the womb. When it
comes down to the nitty-gritty of
policy, maybe, although I think there's
very little wiggle room when it comes to
policy on those three issues. When it
comes to climate change, I actually do
think that goes back to the creation
order, our stewardship of the earth, but
also realizing that we do as humans have
dominion over the earth. It's not the
other way around. That human beings do
matter more than plants or animals, any
other part of creation. But when it
comes to all of the different scientific
discussions and policies surrounding
that, you're right. I don't think that
the Bible speaks clearly to that. I
think we can look throughout scripture
to see the principles for a lot of
things like justice and immigration and
all of that. Um, but those are going to
be open to more debate and discussion
which I am also very open to than the
big three abortion, gender and sexuality
which I think there should be zero
debate on within Christianity. But so in
in theory though then there isn't any
reason why you couldn't share a church
or a tradition with someone who was
pro-life, protraditional marriage and
thought, you know, Christian refugees
from the Middle East deserve better
treatment than the Trump administration
is giving them.
>> Oh yeah.
>> Right.
>> Totally. Mhm. But in practice though, it
does seem like you think that
conservative Christians who hold those
views are, you know, in too far inside
the liberal bubble, right? In the grip
of um in the grip of toxic empathy maybe
in some cases, but but mistaken.
>> No, it would really depend. I mean,
sure, if they were posting out there, if
here's the thing, this is what something
that bothers me and I see this among a
lot of evangelicals. They will only post
about the news when it is an opportunity
to be critical of Trump and they will
claim they're not being political. Like
they will post about if there is a case
that seems like it is racism against a
black person by the police or that's how
maybe the New York Times or another
outlet is describing it or whether it
seems that the Trump administration is
being cruel to refugees or to
immigrants. They will post those
stories, but they will never post
stories that are critical of Joe Biden
or the Democrats or on the other side of
the equation. I think we can disagree as
Christians on some of those things and
the policy solutions to some of those
things. But yes, if you are allowing
your outrage and your compassion to be
exclusively or primarily dictated by
what the mainstream media says is right
and wrong, then yes, I do think that you
are probably being led by toxic empathy.
Now, if you're truly outside of the
political binary and you're like, I
always care about the issues no matter
what. human dignity like is my that's
what I'm following and I care about
whatever story is out there no matter
how it makes any politician look. I can
respect that.
>> All right. So, let's let's then let's
finish with Trump himself and and
Trump's second term, right? You
mentioned earlier that you have
critiques of Trump, you have critiques
of his administration, but they're that
they're often critiques from a
culturally conservative perspective,
right? And these range from critiques of
Trump sort of tap dancing or just
striding away from some pro-life
positions during the campaigns. Um,
you've been pretty critical of the Trump
administration's pro-IVF
stance, which is, I think, pretty
clearly a, you know, a violation of
pro-life principle from, you know,
almost any reasonable definition of the
term. Um, has Trump done anything though
that isn't in some way functionally
pro-choice on abortion policy?
>> H well, I know that he issued that
executive order on IVF, which didn't
have a whole lot of teeth to it. I think
he was just trying to communicate, hey,
I promised that I was going to do this
when I was campaigning and look here,
I'm doing it. Obviously, I think that
that's a step in the wrong direction.
You and I, I think, share that ethic on
uh on life that a lot of people out
there, including conservatives,
including a ton of evangelicals, maybe
even professing Catholics, do not
understand what you just said, that it
is a violation of the pro-life ethic to
be pro IVF. And I don't expect Trump to
understand that. And I don't even know
that I expect a lot of people around
Trump to understand that because what
I've realized in conservative
evangelicalism at least, that is a very
niche view.
I I just think it's clear sort of from a
rhetorical perspective, right, that
Trump in the aftermath of Row has
positioned himself as someone who says
the issue should be returned to the
states. Um we're not going to have
national policy on abortion. We're going
to have some kind of support for or at
least rhetorical support for IVF, which
I I agree with you. sort of pro-life
opposition to um embryo creation and
destruction in IVF is a narrower it's a
more niche position even within the
larger pro-life movement. But I guess I
guess to me, right, like
it it seems that religious conservatives
got a lot out of the bargain with Donald
Trump, more than a lot of anti-Trump
evangelicals and anti-Trump religious
conservatives expected. They did in fact
get Roie Wade overturned. um they got a
lot of moves including moves on issues
related to gender identity uh that you
know would not necessarily have been
predictable 5 to 10 years ago. So I
would never argue that you know that
sort of religious conservatives have
just been taken for a ride by Trump. At
the same time, when I look at Trump's
second term, right, when I look at like
the issues that he's invested in, the
issues that people around him are most
invested in, very few of them seem to
have anything to do with cultural
conservatism, religious conservatism.
Trump doesn't want to talk about
abortion. You can defend his policy on
immigration from a religious
perspective, but I don't think anyone
would argue that like, you know, Steven
Miller is sitting in his office in the
White House carefully balancing the
dictates of Christian charity, you know,
and the biblical admonitions about the
importance of building walls. Steven
Miller just wants to deport people. It
just seems to me that at this moment
religious influence on the Trump
administration and on conservatism is is
ebbing. And I'm curious if you think
that's right or or if you think I'm sort
of overreading that from my position at
the New York Times.
>> Yeah, you know, maybe so. I mean, I'm
for deporting people. I really like
Steven Miller. Evangelical support for
deporting illegal immigrants is very
high. Um, and I just I see a lot of
effort from the left, it seems, to go
after that Christian demographic who is
not so sure about Trump and is almost
looking for an opportunity to not
support any Trump anymore by
highlighting these stories of supposed
cruelty from ICE or the Trump
administration so that more and more
Christians will say, "Yeah, I voted for
Trump, but this is just too far." And
you know, like I was more sympathetic
of the Christian supporter of Donald
Trump to say, "I support deportations,
but the way we're deporting people to a
prison in El Salvador seems like a
violation of natural law." Right. I
mean, like you just did. I support
Trump's position generally on abortion,
but I think what he's doing on IVF is
wrong. you're worried about the
progressives, you know, sort of and
toxic empathy leaking into leaking into
conservative evangelicalism, but doesn't
conservative evangelicalism have more
credibility if it can critique Trump.
>> I would say it might be reasonable. It
might be reasonable. I'm not saying that
it is always unreasonable to listen to
those critiques of Trump or to see those
highlights of supposed cruelty from the
Trump administration and to say, "Wow,
that does seem bad." What I'm saying is
that if Christians are looking to have
credibility with the left or credibility
with progressives or credibility with
the world and they are looking for an
escape route to no longer like Donald
Trump or support Donald Trump that they
so easily without thinking latch on to
the deeply feeling stories that we are
given and say this is just too far for
me without even digging in and asking
the question but is this true or what is
the other side to the story. That's what
I see as a form of toxic empathy. That's
what leads to what I call the mushy
middle. That's where I see a lot of
evangelicals are going. That's the
question that I always want people to
ask. Whether I'm talking or the New York
Times is talking, but is this true? If
it sounds too good or too bad to be true
about either side, that's the question
that we need to ask. But is this true?
And what is on the other side of it? So,
like I said, not always unreasonable,
but it's unreasonable if you're not
using reason. What would you say
to someone watching or listening to this
program who is in the mush mushy middle,
who doesn't like Donald Trump, who is
not, you know, maybe not a reformed
Calvinist Protestant, but is religious,
is Christian, um, is sympathetic to some
of your views on abortion, some of your
views on transgender issues, but feels
like
Trump is using Christianity.
>> Yeah.
>> Rather than Christianity operating
through Trump. Like what is what is your
evangelical in the fullest sense of the
word? Like you're you're you are a
public representative of Christianity,
right? You're talking about what is
truth? You you are you are an arbiter of
truth in contemporary America. What is
your message of outreach to someone who
is who is not sure,
>> who is crossressured?
>> Yeah. What I would say is I really don't
care how you feel about Donald Trump.
You can loathe Donald Trump. You can be
someone who never voted for Donald
Trump, but maybe you're starting to see
that progressive policies aren't in
alignment with the Bible or that they
are just destructive. And I am happy to
have people like that in my community.
There are people like that in my
audience who have never voted for Donald
Trump, but they really agree with me
when it comes to the policies. What I
would say to that person, even if your
mind never changes on Donald Trump, I
don't care. Politicians come and go, but
things are clearer than you think. Make
sure that you are not using nuance as an
excuse not to dig into the truth about
something.
>> And what would it take to alienate you
from politics? M
>> I know a lot of people in the camp of
never Trump or anti-Trump evangelicals,
never Trump anti-Trump Christians. Some
of them have become vehement partisans
of progressive politics. Some of them
have become reluctant supporters of the
Democrats. Some of them have just said,
"Look, American politics doesn't present
choices that Christians in good cons
conscience should be deeply associated
with." Like maybe maybe you still vote
and so on, right? But you just sort of
back out, opt out a little bit. Is there
a line like that for you? Well, I
already don't like politics very much
and I feel like a lot of people do after
the election is that I have backed away
from talking a lot about politics
because we were so in it before the
election and I think a lot of people are
just tired of it. I'm not even saying
that's the right thing, but I think
that's the feeling that a lot of people
have. I see my role as an anchor on the
right. as basically as conservative as
you can get on virtually every issue,
but especially the life issue,
especially gender, especially marriage.
I mean, we are few and far between.
Those of us who actually believe that
the law should have something to say
about the reality of natural marriage
between man and woman and that children
have a right and should have a legal
right to their mom and dad, a mom and
dad at the very least. I mean, there
aren't very many of us over here, but we
have a role to play in persuading people
and pulling people as far as we can into
our camp.
>> But but that would that would imply
basically that there's never a moment
when you leave cuz like functionally on
on samesex marriage, right? The
Republican party um under Trump
>> has basically abandoned that fight and
that debate, right? If you cast a vote
for a Republican politician today,
outside of some very particular
situations, you're just not casting a
vote for the traditional definition of
marriage. You're not.
>> And there was a time, it seems, that
Republicans probably felt like they had
given up on the abortion fight, too. And
then, of course, Roie Wade was
overturned in 2022. And so, things can
change. And I I
>> So, so your view is you stay in the you
stay in the fight, basically. Well, I
guess it depends on what you mean by
stay. I I am not really that involved in
politics. I care about the underlying
issues and making sure as much as we
possibly can that the Bible is informing
our views on those issues. When it comes
to election years, I'm going to speak up
and say what I think Christians should
do. So, if your question is, will I ever
stop doing that? Will I ever stop
saying, hey, I do think Christians
should vote for this person? It depends
on if the left stays as bad as it is.
And if the left stays as bad as it is,
the unfortunate reality, and I truly
don't like this reality, as long as the
right is to the right of that, as long
as the right is more sane than the left,
then my position right now is that we
have an obligation to vote for the more
sane policy platform. I think that's a
low bar right now. Maybe I could change
my mind in a few years, but that's where
I am right now. All right, on that note,
Alli Bethstucky, thanks so much for
joining me.
>> Thank you.
[Music]